ACC-AHA Guidelines 2013 November

The new ACC–AHA cholesterol guidelines differ substantially from the previous ATP-III guidelines, particularly with respect to primary prevention of cardiovascular disease. The ATP-III guidelines place more emphasis on levels of LDL cholesterol to select patients for statin therapy, whereas the new guidelines base the recommendation solely on the 10-year predicted risk, as long as the LDL cholesterol level is 70 mg per deciliter or higher. Using NHANES data, we estimated the effects of these changes on the percentage and mix of the U.S. population for whom statin therapy would be recommended.

We estimate that under the new guidelines, 56.0 million Americans (48.6%) would be eligible for statin therapy, representing almost half of the 115.4 million adults between the ages of 40 and 75 years who have a triglyceride level of less than 400 mg per deciliter. This population would represent a net increase of 12.8 million potential new statin users (an increase of 11.1 percentage points) over the number who would be eligible according to the ATP-III guidelines. The increased number of adults who would be newly eligible for statin therapy suggests higher treatment rates among those expected to have future cardiovascular events (increased sensitivity) but also an increased number of adults receiving therapy who are not expected to have events (decreased specificity).
These new treatment recommendations have a larger effect in the older age group (60 to 75 years) than in the younger age group (40 to 59 years). Although up to 30% of adults in the younger age group without cardiovascular disease would be eligible for statin therapy for primary prevention, more than 77% of those in the older age group would be eligible. This difference might be partially explained by the addition of stroke to coronary heart disease as a target for prevention in the new pooled-cohort equations.4 Since the prevalence of cardiovascular disease rises markedly with age,11 the large proportions of older adults who would be eligible for statin therapy may be justifiable. Further research is required to determine whether more aggressive preventive strategies are needed for younger adults.
The new guideline recommendations would also result in more men being newly eligible for statin therapy than women, although the overall percentages of the two sexes that would be eligible for therapy would remain similar. As compared with the ATP-III guidelines, the new guidelines would also expand the eligibility for statin therapy among adults with a higher blood pressure but substantially lower levels of LDL cholesterol.
We also attempted to estimate the likely effect of the full adoption of the new guidelines on future rates of cardiovascular events. Assuming that the 10-year general cardiovascular risk estimates of D'Agostino et al., when applied to our NHANES sample, would accurately reflect future event rates for the U.S. population, we projected that there will be 11.4 million new cases of cardiovascular disease over the next 10 years among the 103.5 million adults between the ages of 40 and 75 years who do not currently have cardiovascular disease. Using these calculations, we estimated that 16.8% of these 11.4 million adults would be eligible for statin therapy according to the new guidelines but not according to the ATP-III guidelines, a difference of 1.9 million. If statin therapy then reduces the relative cardiovascular risk by 25%, as suggested in meta-analyses of statin use in primary prevention,12 a total of approximately 475,000 future cardiovascular events would be prevented. More than 90% of this potential benefit would occur among older adults. We based this rough estimate of the benefit on several assumptions, including the applicability and accuracy of the 10-year estimate, full adoption of and adherence to the new guidelines, independence of the relative benefit of statin use from the levels of LDL cholesterol or absolute risk, and the applicability of the 25% risk reduction to the general U.S. population despite differences in the case mix of participants who were enrolled in the trials from which the percentage was derived.

Our study has some potential limitations. First, our results are based on data from 3773 NHANES participants extrapolated to 115.4 million U.S. adults and rely on the accuracy and representativeness of the NHANES data from 2005 through 2010 for the current U.S. population. Second, we could not accurately quantify the effects of the new and the old guidelines on patients who are currently receiving lipid-lowering therapy because we could not determine why lipid-lowering therapy had been initiated. Third, the estimate of the numbers of adults currently receiving statin therapy is based on the participant's declaration in the NHANES sample and therefore may be imprecise. Furthermore, we conservatively assumed that missing binary responses represent a “no” answer, which might have resulted in an underestimate of the rate of statin therapy and other characteristics. Fourth, we did not have data on peripheral vascular disease or transient ischemic attacks and thus may have underestimated the numbers of patients with cardiovascular disease. Fifth, information on family history with respect to premature coronary heart disease was based on myocardial infarction or angina in a first-degree relative under the age of 50 years. This age limit is lower than that used in the ATP-III guidelines, which might have slightly reduced the total number of adults who would be eligible for statin therapy. Finally, we have focused on adults between the ages of 40 and 75 years because the new guidelines are less clear outside this age range.

In addition to these limitations, we may have overestimated changes in statin use under the new guidelines for several reasons. We assumed that membership in one of the groups for whom statin therapy would provide benefit equates with treatment recommendation, whereas the new guidelines call for an informed risk–benefit discussion between the patient and physician before the initiation of statin therapy.3 In addition, the effect of an expanded treatment recommendation may be limited by a lack of universal implementation. Under the ATP-III guidelines, the number of adults who would be recommended for statin therapy but who have not reported receiving treatment could be as high as 18 million. Thus, it is not clear what effect the new guidelines would have by expanding the number of adults recommended for therapy. Finally, we did not account for treatment adherence, which has been reported to be low.13,14

In conclusion, the new ACC–AHA guidelines for the management of blood cholesterol have the potential to increase the net number of new statin prescriptions by 12.8 million, including 10.4 million for primary prevention. As compared with the ATP-III guidelines, the new guidelines would substantially increase the number of adults between the ages of 60 and 75 years and lower the LDL cholesterol levels of those who would be recommended for statin therapy.



<!---------------------------
Excerpts v1.0
---------
created: 2014-03-20 08:05:26 +0000
lastModified: 2014-03-30 12:44:29 +0000
---------------------------/>